History of Present Illness
2011 January-February Featured Case and 2010 IDSA Fellows' Day Case Presentation Summary: A woman with an ulcerated lesion on her left thumb.
A woman in her fifties developed a large ulcerated lesion on her left thumb , which increased in size despite the administration of multiple antibiotics (see image below). The lesion was initially painless, but became painful after swelling increased. Gram stain of a specimen obtained by scraping the skin showed no cells or organisms , and wet mount revealed no fungal elements. Cultures of tissue grew Rhodotorula minuta . Radiographs of the hand and results of a three-phase bone scan showed soft tissue swelling, with no evidence of osteomyelitis. Empiric antibiotics, tried in successive order over a 3-month period , included amoxicillin-clavulanate, fluconazole, clindamycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, linezolid, levofloxacin, clarithromycin and voriconazole.
She also noted irritation of the left nostril, with brief episodes of epistaxis. She reported no sore throat, fever, chills, dyspnea or cough.
Past Medical History
She had been in good health before this illness.
Epidemiological History
Three months before presentation, she traveled to for one month, staying in an ecotourism hotel in the region of the Napo River. She reported no direct water exposure, and did not take malaria prophylaxis or use insect repellent. She reported seeing several different kinds of insects and receiving .
Physical Examination
The patient appeared well. The vital signs included blood pressure 135/82 mm Hg, pulse 66 beats per minute, temperature 36.7°C (98.1°F), and respirations 18 breaths per minute. There was a large (4 cm in diameter) raised ulcerated lesion with a violaceous border on the thumb ( Figure 1 ), which was painful to the touch. There was no discharge, bleeding, tracking or other lesion seen. Nasal endoscopy revealed a flesh-colored mass in left middle meatus ( Figure 2 ).
Figure 1. Physical findings on left thumb.
Figure 2. Nasal examination.
Studies
Results of routine laboratory testing were normal. The measured 11 millimeters per hour.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A skin biopsy (3 mm deep) was performed. Histopathological examination of the tissue with hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stain revealed an amastigote , with kinetoplast in a vacuole (Figure 3) . Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of the tissue identified Leishmania guyanensis ; PCR of the blood and nasal washings was negative for the organism. Culture of tissue from the skin biopsy in Schneider’s Media revealed promastigotes, seen in Figure 4 and in the Video .
Video 1. Culture of skin biopsy tissue in Schneider’s medium.
Figure 3. Skin biopsy, H and E stain.
Figure 4. Culture of skin biopsy tissue in Schneider’s medium.
Treatment and Followup
Liposomal amphotericin B (3 mg/kg daily for 7 consecutive days, and 1 additional dose one week later) was administered. Upon follow-up one week after treatment, the skin was improving ( Figure 5 ). After three months, there was no recurrence of the lesion ( Figure 6 ). No further treatment was administered.
Figure 5. Follow-up, one week after treatment.
Figure 6. Follow-up at 3 months.
Discussion
Cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL) has historically been divided into Old and New World, the latter referring to the Americas. This patient was diagnosed with Leishmania guyanensis by PCR and culture. Biopsy is key to the diagnosis; tissue stained with H and E or Giemsa may show rounded amastigotes with kinetoplast (as seen in Figure 3 ).
This patient's exposure and infection most likely occurred during her recent trip to the jungle regions of Ecuador and Napo River. L. guyanensis is found in Guyana, Suriname, Ecuador and northern Amazon basin. L. guyanensis has several mammalian reservoirs [Banuls et al 2007].
The vector is a female sand fly ( Lutzomyia spp) that may infect the host during a blood meal. Promastigotes (seen in Figure 4 ) are injected and then phagocytosed by macrophages and are transformed into amastigotes ( Figure 3 ). Amastigotes rupture out of the cells and are phagocytosed by other reticuloendothelial cells. The cycle is complete when another sand fly ingests the amastigotes by biting non-human mammals; humans are generally accidental hosts and are not bitten with enough frequency to be a major part of the life cycle [Banuls et al 2007]. Clinical symptoms are generally painless, indolent, raised and ulcerating lesions [Magill et al 2005]. Secondary infections and swelling can cause significant pain as in the case of our patient. Mucosal leishmaniasis is limited to certain species with L. guyanensis having a small risk of mucosal involvement. In this patient, the nasal symptoms had resolved before treatment, and nasal endoscopy was thought to be not consistent with leishmaniasis. When there is mucocutaneous involvement, it is one of recrudescence after resolution of primary skin lesions, often a few years later. This patient’s presentation and findings were not consistent with mucocutaneous disease.
Treatment for CL is dependent on the species, geographic origin, evolution of the lesion, and presence or probability of mucosal involvement. Most CL is self-resolving and does not cause systemic disease, but can leave disfiguring scars. The current main treatment is pentavalent antimony, but because of significant side effects and the long duration of treatment, treatment with other drug agents has been investigated [Minodier et al 2007]. Depending on the species, other possible therapies include miltefosine, azoles, and pentamidine [Lai et al 2002]. Currently the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) has approved liposomal amphotericin B for visceral leishmaniasis. While more studies are needed on the use of liposomal amphotericin B for CL, it appears promising [Solomon et al 2007].
Final Diagnosis
Cutaneous leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania guyanensis , after traveling to Ecuador.
References
Banuls, A.L., Hide, M., and Prugnolle, F. (2007). Leishmania and the leishmaniases: a parasite genetic update and advances in taxonomy, epidemiology and pathogenicity in humans. Adv Parasitol 64, 1-109.
PMID:17499100 ( PubMed abstract )
Lai, A.F.E.J., Vrede, M.A., Soetosenojo, R.M., and Lai, A.F.R.F. (2002). Pentamidine, the drug of choice for the treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis in Surinam. Int J Dermatol 41, 796-800.
PMID:12453009 ( PubMed abstract )
Magill AJ. Cutaneous leishmaniasis in the returning traveler. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2005;19:241-266,x-xi.
PMID:15701556 ( PubMed abstract )
Minodier, P., and Parola, P. (2007). Cutaneous leishmaniasis treatment. Travel Med Infect Dis 5, 150-158.
PMID:17448941 ( PubMed abstract )
Solomon, M., Baum, S., Barzilai, A., Scope, A., Trau, H., and Schwartz, E. (2007). Liposomal amphotericin B in comparison to sodium stibogluconate for cutaneous infection due to Leishmania braziliensis. J Am Acad Dermatol 56, 612-616.
PMID:17276541 ( PubMed abstract )
